What is no Js?
Exactly?
No.
Js is a server side JavaScript runtime environment.
Let's break that sentence down.
No,
Js is a server side.
It's an application that runs on a computer's operating system,
as opposed to in a Web browser or on a phone Java script.
Runtime environment.
It's an application that looks at JavaScript,
decides which job script files or commands should be executed and when,
and then sends that JavaScript to an embedded JavaScript engine V eight for execution on
the computer.
If you recall what the V eight is from the previous lecture,
you can think of the eight as a car's engine and drive train.
While no Js is everything else that makes the car the seats,
the steering wheel,
the windows,
etcetera and as a no Js developer,
you are the driver of the car.
If you didn't have no Js,
it be like trying to drive an engine down the street.
You'd have to manually squirt gas into the cylinders at the right time and pull on pieces
of the chassis to make it turn it be very difficult to drive the vehicle down the street
and without the engine and only the car shell,
you wouldn't be able to go anywhere at all.
So both the engine and the shell are important and crucial to being able to operate the car
.
Similarly,
without node,
using V eight would be very difficult.
You'd not only have to write your JavaScript files,
but then write another application that packages up and send those JavaScript files to V
eight at the right time,
then handles the response.
No Js does all that for you.
So what is node?
It's a C plus plus application that in beds V eight,
if we look at the first few commits that Ryan doll made to know J s weaken,
see him embedding the V eight application and then writing more C plus plus that handles
the logic of figuring out which JavaScript ascend to v eight and when and what to do with
the responses in modern no Js you can still see via embedded in there,
though the rest of the code bases many 1000 times larger than it used to be in crafting no
Js and iterating on it.
Over time,
Ryan Doll and other contributors have made two primary programs,
both of which get called from the command line,
a rebel read evil print loop and a script processor.
Let's start with the script processor.
The script processor gets called by simply invoking node and naming the script you'd like
to execute.
Example would be node index dot Js.
In this way,
you're passing a script name to know J s so that node can open that file and process the
JavaScript commands within it,
but it's a bit more complicated.
Met when you invoke the note program.
In this way,
note isn't simply going to pass your drive a script to V eight.
It's first going to initialize a process called the Event Loop,
and then it's going to process the initial parts of your JavaScript file.
And then it's going to start processing the invent loop it initialized earlier.
You can think of the event loop as an infinitely repeating task that starts over Justus
suit as it completes each pass of this task,
or each tick,
as it's called,
consists of no Js checking to see if there's anything else it needs to do.
Now,
you might be saying Wait,
didn't note already process the file at the beginning before it started the loop?
Well,
yes and no.
If you recall,
javascript can include both synchronous and asynchronous behaviors.
Synchronous behaviors are executed and completed by node as soon as they are encountered,
while asynchronous behaviors air simply invoked but not immediately completed.
Instead,
these behaviors just get added to ah que,
which lists everything a synchronous that no Js still has left to do.
The event loop is nodes way of processing that to do list.
With each tick of the loop,
it completes an item or several items on its list.
But those items may very well create further items asynchronous operations that need to be
completed later.
So every time the event loop runs,
the number of items left to complete may just stay the same.
Or it may grow.
If at some point the event loop checks off the final thing it had to do on its to do list,
and there's nothing left for it to do.
The application exits.
That's the end.
If,
however,
each task on the list creates a new task on the lists,
and so the length of the to do list never reaches zero that it's possible for no to run
indefinitely or infinitely,
and never reach a point where it needs to exit.
Many note programs like servers or background workers,
for example,
are designed this way to perpetually create more items on the to do list and never let
their to do list get down to zero.
That way,
the application never dies.
Items that can be added to the to do list include any task that shouldn't be executed
synchronously,
such as those invoked with a call back and those whose execution is scheduled at a later
time,
such as timeouts and intervals.
We call this umbrella of tasks non blocking in many programming languages.
Everything you do is block it.
That is,
if you have a sequence of tasks that need to be performed.
Your single threaded application will perform each task in order.
And while it's executing each task,
it is incapable of doing anything else.
That is what is meant by blocking.
Each task is quote unquote blocking.
If it is occupying,
the resource is of the thread.
And if the application logic will need to be focused on that task at the expense of
anything else,
it might be doing at the time blocking tax and run times with a blocking I oh,
definitely have their place.
If you must perform a sequence of tax in an exact order,
and there's nothing else your thread would rather be doing than there is virtually no
drawback toe a blocking Iot.
But that is often not the case with modern Web applications.
Web ABS often need to handle and process multiple things at a single time.
While you're a P,
I is fetching database results for one user's request.
It must also be simultaneously sending a welcome email to another user and looking up the
Twitter profile of another while charging the credit card of yet another.
So how does a non blocking Io enable an application threat to handle multiple things at the
same time?
Well,
it doesn't no Js is single threat,
although it can spawn on the threads,
which we'll discuss later.
But for argument's sake,
it's best to understand node as having a single thread that can only do one thing at a time
.
The concept of a non blocking Io and the concept of an event loop doesn't allow no to do
multiple things at one time.
It just allows node to schedule things later.
This might sound trivial,
but it's actually a huge deal.
If you take a close look at what modern Web applications actually do when they process a
request the vast majority of the time they aren't actually doing anything.
They're just waiting for some other thing to do something.
And while they're waiting,
they're blocked from doing anything else.
For example,
let's say you've created an A P I in a language or platform that only has a single threaded
or blocking io and doesn't allow any asynchronous calls.
Now,
let's say a post request comes into the A P I.
And that request contains the information of a new user and that user data needs to be
written to the database.
Your A P I parses the request,
gets the user data,
then sends the data to the DB waits for the DB to respond while your code is waiting for
the database to respond,
it is blocked.
It's not doing anything,
but since the platform has a blocking,
I owe it.
Can't do anything else.
There might be many other things that your baby I could be doing and wants to do at that
moment except and respond to different requests coming in from another user or perform some
background task.
But it can't not until the database response and much of your back end system likely acts
this way.
It contacts other services by rest,
ful AP eyes and waits for them to respond or rights information to the database it performs
,
reads and writes to the disk.
While it's doing these things in waiting for its counter party to respond,
it is blocked from doing anything else,
and it's stuck in a state of idleness.
Non blocking Iose and event loops are the answer to this issue.
You see when notice faced with processing the same a P I request,
it will take in the user data,
parse it synchronously just like any other a p I.
But then,
when it needs to send that information to the database it was.
Send off the information to the DB,
then put an item on its to do list,
saying whenever the database responds,
process the response.
So now,
while the database is processing the data,
the no Js thread will move on to its other tasks process other user requests,
etcetera.
When the database finally responds.
The event Luke processor will see.
Oh,
I just got a response from the database and I have a to do list item saying to send that
response to this function over here.
So I'm going to do that now.
In this way,
no Js is continually getting out of its own way when encounters anything that would
normally require blocking the thread and waiting around doing nothing.
Note is designed to move that task out of the way and then do it at some point when it has
downtime.
Note is simply much better at managing its own time.
It's constantly re prioritizing the tasks in front of it,
so it's never sitting around waiting at a time when it could actually be doing something.
Many of the note AP eyes,
such as writing to disk,
are designed a synchronously in this way.
And as in no Js developer,
you're encouraged to design your programs around this idea as well.
So now you understand how node executes the tasks inside of a javascript file.
It works with V A to decide which function should be executed in at what moment and in
which order it interacts with third party counter parties like the discord databases and AP
eyes,
but never since around waiting for them to respond.
Instead,
it keeps itself busy with other tasks,
while counter parties air taking their time to respond.
The idea of non blocking Io asynchronous functions and the event loop all revolve around
this concept.
Now that we understand that we need to get a handle on how node runs an entire application
split across many files.
After all,
when you start a note application,
you don't specify a set of files or a directory of files.
You actually only specify a single file that needs to be executed.
This may seem counterintuitive because,
as you know,
applications are often made of dozens or hundreds or thousands of individual files,
not just one.
So how does node start an entire application when all you tell it is to start one file?
This is where nodes module system comes into play.
If you've used note before,
you've likely encountered require or import statements like these,
usually at the top of source files.
Here's an example within node require and import,
which R.
E.
S five and s six syntax respectively do virtually the same thing.
They grab a resource from elsewhere and allow you to assign the contents off that resource
to a variable or define it as a constant.
Similarly,
if you've looked at a node package or module before,
you've likely seen that it contains a module dot exports or a export declaration.
This line declares what content should be sent to another file when that file imports or
requires this one.
For example,
File A is an object containing a function called food file.
Be wants to use file a fu function so it imports or requires all of file A and A signs its
content to a variable called My imported Functions.
Now file aces.
Full function will be available to use within file.
Be by calling my imported functions dot food.
As you browse through a no Js application,
you'll see import require statements all over the place.
These Air notes way of letting each file say which other files contents it needs access to
.
When you zoom out.
All of these require or import statements form a bit of a tree.
The index dot Js file requires the controller file.
The controller file requires the lib file.
The lib file requires the sdk of some database and that SdK require several helpers,
etcetera,
etcetera.
So back to the topic at hand.
When you start it.
No Js application by invoking a single file node simply starts reading through that file
looks at which other files it requires been,
reads those looks through which files they require and reads in those other ones,
and continues all the way through all of the files that the entire application needs until
it has read the entire application into memory.
So in this way,
if you haven't sdk or library or package sitting in your applications directory.
But none of the files in your application ever called that sdk no drill treated like it
doesn't exist,
and it won't read it into memory when the application starts.
So let's go back to the original question we were trying to answer.
What doesn't node Script processor do now?
We can see it does a few things when you call node index dot Js.
You're passing the name of the index dot Js file to note,
and it will be getting a reading it,
and then it will read in all the other files by traversing the dependency tree codified in
those files.
And then it will begin executing the synchronous tasks called in those files and then start
processing all the asynchronous tasks by repeating its event.
Loop over and over until it has nothing to do.
Isn't waiting for any responses that has nothing scheduled for the future,
and at that point it will exit.
Now that you understand the script processor understanding the rebel read evil print loop
should be easy.
The Ripple works much like the console within a Web browser.
It is a way to define an execute JavaScript code against the V eight engine in real time
when you enter the node command in your terminal,
but don't supply a file name for no to execute.
Note will start the rappel automatically.
You will see a cursor marker appear in your terminal,
which tells you that the rebel has started the our phase of its process.
Reading input from you.
So initially,
all the rebel is going to do is start the event loop in the background than sit and wait
for you to write something and press return.
Here,
you can write any statements that you could write in a no Js JavaScript file.
The caveat is,
line breaks within strings may need to be escaped with a backslash before you press return
,
but besides that,
you can do anything you want within the rebel.
You could define variables and manipulate them or add them together.
You can define and execute functions,
and you can even define and execute a synchronous processes.
The ripple stages are just what they sound like.
It moves from our reading input from U T E executing whatever you wrote to pee printing its
response or the return values of your functions or whatever your code said should be loved
.
And then it does L.
It loops back up to the top and repeats that process again.
All of no Js is made available to you within the command line,
including requiring and importing modules.
So that is how node works.
Now let's take a closer look at a sample,
know J s application and walk you through the pieces that you see there